hi this video is about a specific
question of the fate of the Chinese
economy but it also engages with the
broader problem of economic illiteracy
and the fact that so many of my fellow
Canadians who are products of the same
education that I escaped from perhaps
the same system I'm still trapped in are
so easily manipulated by the
presentation of economic factoids in
isolation the fellow you see on the
screen right now has presented this
scary-lookin chart to insinuate that the
government of China is on the edge of an
economic collapse and that it's on the
edge of a collapse broadly similar to
what you have lately heard about in the
news as the collapse of the Greek
economy so that would be a sovereign
debt crisis so the scary red line shows
you how much money the government of
China is spending and were simply left
to imagine that the increase in this red
line shown in isolation with no context
with no comparison to Greece or Italy or
any other country that this alone
indicates that china is on the edge of
an economic collapse that it can never
recover from if you're someone who cares
sincerely about economics you'll see
right away several problems with that
chart not to mention the argument that's
pinned onto it the unit of currency is
simply billions not adjusted for
inflation that's why that curve is so
smooth and why it increases so rapidly
in any given year if the Chinese
government increased its budget by ten
percent but inflation was five percent
then we would only describe the increase
in China's budget as five percent not
ten percent now year after year
inflation in China during a 20-year
period has been very very significant
and that's also why when you look at
this scary red line you don't see many
sudden disruptions in the smooth flow of
the line
for specific historical events which you
would expect to see you'd expect to see
some kind of twist or bump related to
economic crises 2007-2008 and so on
right so when we look at this chart
instead this is a chart generated by
google but using data from the IMF here
we have the same statistic total
government expenditure for China as a
blue line but because this is measured
as a percentage of GDP and therefore
we're removing inflation from the
equation we're looking at a very
different curve and we have specific
discontinuities in the line that are
related to economic events that we may
or may not remember from history
obviously there's a sharp turn in this
line in 2007-2008 that's what we'd
expect to see and that's we do see here
we have a much more meaningful curve and
indeed the line is not going up as
sharply or as rapidly or alarmingly as
the red line we looked at in the earlier
chart but we still aren't looking at it
in context is this a problem oh well
here we've added a second line of the
chart there's China and there's Thailand
now Thailand is an interesting
comparison it's what you might call a
moderately wealthy nation or a
moderately poor nation certainly
compared to many other nations in Asia
its wealthy but it's poor compared to
Western European countries so putting
China and Thailand in the same chart
puts things in perspective now suddenly
the level of spending by the Chinese
government does not seem shocking just
because we have one example to compare
it to now Thailand is not on the edge of
sovereign debt crisis and neither is
China so suddenly these numbers seem
reasonable rather than shocking or
horrendous as they did in the first
place when they were presented with a
Oda justment for inflation and with
absolutely no context to compare it to
now we've added a third line to the
chart so there's Canada's level of
expenditure now whether or not Canada's
government is spending too much money is
certainly a topic that is constantly
debated in our political system during
this period of time 1994 to 2014 you can
see that the Canadian government has
been struggling to keep our level of
spending down to about forty percent of
GDP rather than fifty percent but during
this period during these 20 years Canada
has not been growing the way China has
been growing this is a period of time
when China was building railroads that
connected cities that had never been
connected by rail road before this is a
period when China was extending
electricity both electrical production
and electrical connectivity to areas of
the country that never had electricity
before along with telephones running
water access to health care China
created a brand new system of social
insurance or health care payments so
both the Chinese economy has developed
during this time but also China's
government services and infrastructure
have fundamentally developing this time
so it's not surprising that Canada is
sort of in a struggle to keep its
government expenses reasonable whereas
China is actually expanding the scope of
what the government pays for and so what
these lines mean in the real world is
more significant then you know it's not
just an abstract figure this corresponds
to real political changes and real
social changes so again now China's the
what used to seem to be a terrifying a
red line suddenly moving up here we see
China as a blue line and it seems quite
moderate the initial supposition was
that China was on the edge of a crisis
that the government was going to
collapse because of its levels of debt
if instead we asked the question well
can China sustain the same level of day
as tile and the answer is yes easily
it's not a problem can China sustain the
same level of debt as Canada yes
probably if the blue line in the middle
of the chart here in the next couple of
years if it continues up to match we're
canada's at right now that also would
not be a crisis it wouldn't put the
country on the edge of collapse so far
we have only looked at how much money
the government of China is spending if
we sincerely believed in the thesis that
china is on the edge of a sovereign debt
crisis then we would look at the
statistic for how much money the
government of China is spending to repay
its debts or to maintain its debt and in
English the verb we use for this these
days is service we talk about a country
servicing its debts so in the Greek
crisis when they talk about servicing
the debt normally because Greece can't
really repay the debt that has to do
with them just paying interest and
managing their debt so that's the
slightly vague term we use and there is
a handy statistic for this here is the
blue line this blue line does not show
that china is struggling to repay its
debts on the contrary it's getting
easier and easier for China to service
its debts back in 1994 it was relatively
expensive for China to maintain its debt
load and at the end of this chart which
is 2012 it's the most recent data we
have you can see that it has gotten
easier and easier and cheaper and
cheaper for China to maintain and
expanding a line of credit now the
reason why so many people ignore
statistics of this kind is that they
feel there should be a kind of morality
to debt that as the Chinese government
spends more money there ought to be more
danger more of a sort of threat of
punishment of doom it's not the case not
the case for China in the year 2015
why is the Chinese government spending
more money partly because they can it is
getting easier for them to spend more
money so this is the percentage of gross
national income that china is spending
to service its debt now again as
impressive as this blue line maybe we
need to see it in context here the blue
line is still China the red line is
Cambodia and the yellow line is Laos the
lao people's democratic republic well if
we actually thought China were
struggling to manage its debts we would
at least expect to see a line like
Cambodia's line there Cambodia the red
line is going up and you can see
cambodia is spending more and more as a
percentage of gross national income they
are increasingly preoccupied with paying
back their debts with servicing their
debts now that still doesn't mean it's a
crisis I don't think if you look it up
you're going to hear that the Cambodian
government has a sovereign debt crisis
and here again you can see it in context
well compared to Laos Laos doesn't have
the same kind of trend but Laos is at a
much higher level of expenditure by this
measure in servicing its debt so China
even though its debt is large its debt
is cheap it's manageable and not only is
it remain manageable it's actually
gotten easier and easier for them to
manage here we have the comparison to
India and Sri Lanka now although Sri
Lanka is not in the news headlines the
way that Greece currently is Sri Lanka
is an example of a country that really
is in danger of a sovereign debt crisis
and it has been for many years Greece
also was at risk of a debt crisis for
many years before it became an open fact
that everyone couldn't deny that a
crisis was underway so in terms of
understanding China situation China
right now is in a better situation than
India for borrowing money and spending
money
and it's in a dramatically better
situation than Sri Lanka Sri Lanka is
itself in a better situation than Greece
but Sri Lanka really is in trouble and
of course this is in my opinion only if
you google around it's not difficult to
find articles that are proclaiming that
Sri Lanka may be on the edge of a
sovereign debt crisis probably not this
year next year but soon and if you're an
optimist of course you know the
government could avoid it human
ingenuity is what it is and of course
than the other hand there are
professional ratings agencies that
evaluate China's debt they're dead
outlook and China is consistently
getting very high marks which simply
means that China will continue to have
the ability to borrow money and spend
money in an advantageous way if you're
wondering what Sri Lanka's rating is by
the fitch agencies definition they rate
Sri Lankan bonds as junk bonds so for
the Sri Lankan government it is very
expensive and very difficult to get new
loans to raise new money and spend new
money and for China it's easy I think
that statistics of this kind unpopular
because they remind us of the ways in
which life is unfair Sri Lanka maybe a
small country that has suffered through
a long civil war and we may not like to
imagine that they're unfairly burdened
with a terrible government debt and
China may be a huge country with huge
levels of government spending and we may
want to believe that for moral reasons
that should burden the government of
China that the government China should
be struggling to repay its debt okay but
when we look at economic facts we're not
looking at moral feelings if China
really were on the edge of a sovereign
debt crisis then when you look at this
chart the line for China should be a lot
more like the line for Sri Lanka both in
terms of how high it is in the chart and
you'd probably expect to see a sort of
jagged line as the country struggles
to service its debts you know the
Chinese economy does have very serious
problems but this isn't one of them the
Chinese economies problem is not a
sovereign debt crisis I think that one
of the main misconceptions is simply
China's overall level of wealth China is
a poor country and it continues to be a
poor country the chart on screen shows
you way down at the bottom the gross
national product per person so per
capita we like to say adjusted for
purchasing power parity so for China
this is unbelievably lower than Japan
Japan really is and continues to be a
much wealthier nation than China ever
has me and China is not catching up to
Japan you can see in terms of the line
Japan you know the rich get richer and
the poor by and large stay poor so even
though China has had such tremendous
economic growth over such a long period
of time it's very humbling to compare
that red line at the bottom to poor
countries like Gabon and chile china is
nowhere remotely close to catching up
with japan gross domestic product per
capita at purchasing power parity is a
very useful statistic for
conceptualising wealth and poverty here
you see Malaysia Thailand and Laos as
three lines on a chart Thailand is
wealthier than Laos Malaysia is
wealthier than Thailand and we do not
mean the wealth of the government we do
not mean how much money is concentrated
in the hands of the government but this
is reflecting levels of income and
expenditure for ordinary people for the
average of all people in the country so
there are no surprises here but ask
yourself before we go on to the next
slide where do you think China will be
in this chart I think that most people
who watch the news or exposed to sort of
mainstream casual economic thinking
imagine that china is a towering giant
economically and that it's much more
powerful and important than any of these
countries and therefore that it is
wealthier here's the sobering reality
the red line on this chart shows China
China remains a very poor country and if
you compare the lines of China and
Thailand China is still today a poorer
country then Thailand the Chinese people
are poorer than the Thai people but
moreover the economic growth in china
between 2004 and 2014 has only been
sufficient for people in china to catch
up with what thailand had already
accomplished back in about two thousand
four 2005 okay so China is a country
with serious economic problems many of
them stemming from poverty it's also a
country with tremendously serious
political problems that I've just
happened not to be discussing in this
short video however among those problems
a sovereign debt crisis is not one of
them increasing government spending in
China is not one of them